mod: Beginner Guide: rewrote the gamma correction section (#349)
IrisShaders/DocsPage: src/content/docs/current/Guides/Your First Shader/3_composite_lighting.mdx

This tutorial is still being developed. Some statements may be incorrect, and things may change in the future. Got any feedback? [Comment on the tracking issue](https://github.com/IrisShaders/DocsPage/issues/327).
:::

In this section we will implement basic diffuse shading in the composite pass. As such, we will be primarily editing `composite.fsh`.

## Gamma Correction

> Our eyes don't percieve light linearly, but rather on a generally logarithmic scale. For example, the color that appears to your eyes as halfway between black and white actually only emits roughly 25% of the photons that white does. Because of this, computer images (such as Minecraft's textures) are stored in the **sRGB color space**, which dedicates more precision to darker colors. Approximately, the color value stored on the computer is the actual value of photons emitted raised to the power of 1/2.2, which is known as **gamma correction**. When it comes for your monitor to display these colors to the screen, it raises the values to the power of 2.2 - the inverse of the gamma correction - to emit the correct amount of photons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our eyes don't percieve light linearly, but rather on a generally logarithmic scale. For example, the color that appears to your eyes as halfway between black and white actually only emits roughly 25% of the photons that white does. Because of this, computer images (such as Minecraft's textures) are stored in the **sRGB color space**, which dedicates more precision to darker colors. Approximately, the color value stored on the computer is raised to the power of 1/2.2, which is known as **gamma correction**. When it comes for your monitor to display these colors to the screen, it raises the values back to the power of 2.2 - the inverse of the gamma correction - to emit the correct amount of photons.
```

> This means that a color value of 0.5 stored on a computer does look halfway between white and black. However, when working with lighting effects, we want the actual value of photons and not the human perception of the color. To achieve this, we can ourselves apply inverse gamma correction by raising the colors to the power of 2.2 before applying lighting effects. Just after we sample `colortex0` in `composite.fsh`, let's apply the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with lighting effects, we want the actual brightness and not the human perception of the color. To achieve this, we can ourselves apply inverse gamma correction by raising the colors to the power of 2.2 before applying lighting effects. Just after we sample `colortex0` in `composite.fsh`, let's apply the following:
```

```glsl
color.rgb = pow(color.rgb, vec3(2.2));
```

This converts our color to the linear color space. However, since monitors expect colors to be in the sRGB color space, we must reapply gamma correction before the color is outputted to the screen. To do this, let's make a `final` pass by creating two new files - `final.vsh` and `final.fsh`. Both of these can be identical to our `composite` pass as it stands right now, except we will instead do:

```glsl
color.rgb = pow(color.rgb, vec3(1.0 / 2.2));
```

Because `colortex` buffers are designed to hold gamma corrected colors, you will lose some possible color values if you write linear color to them. We can solve this by simply increasing the precision of the buffer  with the following code.

```glsl
/*

> const int colortex0Format = RGBA16;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const int colortex0Format = RGB16;
```

*/
```

:::caution[Warning]
Observe that the declaration for the format is in a *multi-line comment*. This is because this code does not actually need to make it onto the GPU. Instead, Iris reads it, and knows to set the format of the buffer as we defined it. That means we can place this code anywhere in the shaderpack.

The following is *not valid!* The declaration must be on its own line.

```glsl

> // const int colortex0Format = RGB16F;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// const int colortex0Format = RGB16;
```

```
:::

> By default, `colortex` buffers are RGBA8, meaning they store 8-bit integers which can encode a maximum of 256 color values. By increasing the precision to 16-bit, our buffer can now encode 65535 color values!

Reviewer: It can encode 256 per channel, that's still 16777216 actual colours - I would specify that it's per channel

:::tip[VRAM Costs]

> Just like your CPU, GPUs have a limited amount of RAM, know as Video RAM (VRAM). Increasing the precision of your buffers also increases their VRAM cost. While modern GPUs have more than enough VRAM to support one higher-precision buffer, it still remains best practice to fix the precision issue by using the default RGBA8 and converting your colors back to sRGB any time before writing them to the buffer. Saving VRAM can become very important as you start to code more complex projects, but for the sake of simplicity, this tutorial will instead merely increase the precision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like your CPU, GPUs have access to a limited amount of memory, know as Video RAM (VRAM). Increasing the precision of your buffers also increases their VRAM cost. While modern GPUs have more than enough VRAM to support one higher-precision buffer, it is always important to consider how much precision you actually need. In this case, it would be more memory efficient to stick to using RGBA8 and convert colors to and from sRGB whenever writing them to the buffer, however for the purposes of this tutorial, a precision increase is simpler.
```
